THE  EXPERIMENTAL TAXONOMY  OF  EUROPEAN  CALLITRICHE
By J. P. Savidge
Hartley Botanical Laboratories, University of Liverpool
The eight species of Callitriche occurring in Europe can be grouped, into two
distinct sections of the genus : Pseudocallitriche and Eucallitriche. The Pseudocallitriche have flowers without bracts, linear leaves without stomata or pellucid
glands, a basic chromosome number of x = 3 and are always completely submerged : the Eucallitriche have two bracts to each flower, linear to ovate
leaves with stomata and pellucid glands, a basic chromosome number of
x = 5 and can be either submerged or terrestrial. The two European Pseudocallitriche species, C. hermaphroditica L. (C. autumnalis L.) and C. truncata Guss
show little morphological variation but the six Eucallitriche species are extremely
polymorphic and occur in a wider range of habitats.
An important aspect in the study of the polymorphic species, belonging to
the Eucallitriche, is the investigation of characters used in the separation of the
species. This has been done in two ways : (i) by making a biometric analysis
of populations of the same species growing in widely different habitats, and (ii)
by placing clonal sub-cultures into different habitats. Although the results
of this investigation are not yet complete the data so far obtained indicate
that certain characters such as leaf-shape are phenotypically extremely variable stamen and stigma length show some variation in size but they can be used for
the separation of species providing an allowance is made for differing environmental condition ; other characters such as mericarp size, width of rnericart>
wing and pollen diameter show little variation.
If an accurate separation of the species is required a microscope should be
used for measurements of characters such as length of stamens and mericart>
and width of mericarp wing. After identifying plants from a large number of
populations experience is gained of other characters such as colour and texture
which provide additional guides to the separation of the species
Probably the most effective means of identification is by comparing the
population under investigation with a series of species polygons. The polygons
used in the figure are based on 300 measurements for each character and are
obtained from plants growing in all the habitats in which the species are found
Controlled interspecific hybridizations to determine whether it is possible
to produce hybrids have been carried out. In inter-specific cross pollinations
using 5,000 flowers from 140 cultures there was only one cross in which viable
fruits developed. The mericarps of this cross, between C. piatycarpa Kutz.and
C. stagnahs Scop., took a month to germinate (three to five days is the normal
germination period), grew slowly and after the development of the third pair
of leaves the seedlings turned yellow and died.
Observations at localities in which three or four species of the section
EucaUttrtche grew intermingled did not reveal any plants of apparent hybrid
origin, even after all four species had been flowering at the same time. Only
one naturally occurring hybrid population of Callitriche has been found during
Polygons of C. piatycarpa, C. polymorpha, C. slagnalis and key-diagram. Note the intermediate position of C. piatycarpa between the other two species. The thick continuous line linking the radii indicates the mean value for each character or character
index. The extreme limits for each character are indicated by transverse MrZl.
across the relevant radu. The dotted lines and calibration markers on the radii
measuring guides. Fruit index is 100 length x width ; pollen index is 100 length/
width.                                                                                                                         Sln/
the last five years. This hybrid population was at Hillerod, some 35 km. northwest of Kobenhavn. Construction of a polygon indicated that it was intermediate between C. platycarpa and C. polymorpha Lonnr. and examination of
first meiotic metaphase in pollen mother cells showed that it was a triploid with
one quadrivalent, three bivalents and five univalents. Such pairing indicates
that there was a probable ancestral relationship between the diploid and tetraploid parents of the hybrid. From a study of this hybrid population (to be
presented in another paper) there is good evidence that C. platycarpa (2n = 20)
is an allotetraploid derived from C. polymorpha (2n = 10) and C. stagnates (2n
= 10). The figure shows the intermediate position of C. platycarpa between
the two probable parental species.
It is the presence of the three closely related species, C. platycarpa, C. stagnates and C. polymorpha, in North-west Kurope that has caused botanists so
much difficulty over the last 130 years. Biometric studies have shown the three
species to be distinct and the artificial hybridizations have indicated that
C. platycarpa and C. stagnates do not readily interbreed. The past difficulties
have been mainly due to botanists failing to recognize C. platycarpa as a distinct
species. At the best C. platycarpa has been given varietal rank by British botanists and a number of Continental botanists have regarded C. platycarpa as a
synonym of C. stagnates.
In Britain it has been found that C. platycarpa is a common lowland species
but that it is extremely unlikely that C. polymorpha and C. palwstris L. (C. verna
L.), which have normally been included in British floras, occur in the British
Isles.   They are, however, common throughout Fennoscandia.
