A phenetic comparison of some Fumaria spp.
{Fumariaceae)
J. Bastow Wilson, Michael G. Daker, and John P. Savidge
Received June 20, 1989; in revised version March 6, 1990
Key words: Angiosperms, Fumariaceae, Papaveraceae, Fumaria.  Phenetics, numerical
taxonomy.
Abstract: The taxonomy of the genus Fumaria has not been considered in detail since
Pugsley's work in 1919 ff., and few modern methods have been applied to it. In a phenetic
study, 33 populations of 11 Fumaria spp. were grown in uniform conditions, and seven
morphological characters measured. After re-expression and transformation the data were
analysed by cluster analysis and principal components analysis. Alternative analyses did
not indicate contradictory taxonomic conclusions. Artificial crosses gave some evidence on
interfertility, and suggested F. occidentalis to be an allopolyploid of F. bastardii x F.
capreolaia. Pugsley's subsectional classification is supported within sect. Parviflora, but
not within sect. Grandiflora. His two sections are seen to be meaningful, but not discrete.
Fumaria is a widespread genus of the Fumariaceae jPapaveraceae. Its members have
some economic significance as weeds, and as sources of medical alkaloid drugs.
The most recent sub-generic classification of Fumaria was that of Pugsley (1919,
1927, 1932, 1934, 1937) (Table 1). The present study applies phenetic methods to
the study of relationships within the genus, based on 11 species grown in uniform
conditions. Where possible, seed was obtained from several populations. This enables some examination of specific delimitation, judgement of species distinctions
in the light of within-species variation, and a check on the methods used. However,
practical constraints limited the total number of populations that could be handled.
Material and methods
Character measurement. Seeds were collected from wild populations of 11 species (Table
2), germinated, and the plants grown in uniform garden conditions at Aberystwyth, W.
Wales. More than one population was sampled for four species, and for two subspecies of
one of those. The populations were from Wales, England, and Germany. There were 33
populations in all. (All populations of F. muralis sampled were of subsp. boraei.) Preserved
racemes and seed samples were deposited in the Herbarium of the University College of
Wales.
It was intended to measure characters accurately on a reasonable number of plants.
Practical limitations therefore dictated that only characters that were useful discriminants,
and could be objectively quantified, be used. After preliminary investigation, these criteria
led to the selection of the following characters, which were then measured on all plants:
Raceme length: racemes were taken from 10 plants per population in the middle of the
flowering period, and 20 racemes measured per plant where available.
Number of flowers per raceme: sampled as for raceme length. Flowers that had matured
into fruits and aborted flowers amongst fruits on the main rachis were counted, but not
aborted flowers at the apex nor the occasional aborted flowers arising in the axils of other
flowers.
Peduncle length: sampled as for raceme length.
Corolla length: 10 mature flowers were measured from each raceme.
Sepal length: sampled as for corolla length; defined as the distance from the apex to
the point of attachment.
Sepal width (at the widest point): sampled as for corolla length.
Pollen grain diameter: Pollen was taken from four plants per population, from the
oldest flower in each raceme not yet dehisced. 25 grains were measured per plant.
Character expression. The calculation of simple correlation coefficients between the
seven morphological characters showed high collinearity (Fig. 1). Sepal width, sepal length,
corolla length and peduncle length formed a highly inter-correlated group, all reflecting
overall size. Most of these characters were therefore re-expressed:
Corolla length was included in the analysis as a simple measure.
Sepal length was re-expressed as:
sepal: corolla length = sepal length/corolla length.
Sepal width was re-expressed:
sepal shape = sepal width/sepal length.
Peduncle length was re-expressed:
peduncle: corolla length = peduncle length/corolla length.
Pollen diameter was less highly correlated with this group; moreover whilst there is
logical reason to expect the above group of characters to be intercorrelated, there is little
a priori expectation (except perhaps via ploidy level) why pollen diameter should be correlated with them. Pollen diameter was therefore left as a simple measure.
Raceme length and the number of flowers per raceme were less strongly, and negatively,
correlated with the characters discussed above. However, they were highly positively correlated with each other. Therefore:
Raceme length was left as a simple measure.
Number of flowers per raceme was re-expressed as:
flower spacing = raceme length/number of flower per raceme.
Variation in corolla and raceme length seemed likely, a priori, to be proportional to the
mean, rather than additive; inspection of the distributions confirmed this. They were therefore log transformed. The distribution of ratios is intrinsically skewed; all ratios were
therefore also log transformed. Since the units of measurement of length and of pollen
diameter were arbitrary, all characters were standardized to zero mean and unit variance.
Analysis methods. Classification was performed by cluster analysis ( Sneath & Sokal
1973), after re-expression, transformations and standardization as described above. Group
average (=UPGMA) was the primary sorting strategy used, selected for its space conservation and lack of reversals (Lance & Williams 1967). However, median ( = weighted
centroid) and nearest neighbour (= single linkage) sorting strategies were also used. The
primary dissimilarity measure used was Euclidean distance (divided by the number of
characters):
deJk = nJi=(XiJ"Xlk)2
where: dejk = the Euclidean distance between OTU (operational taxonomic unit) j and
OTU k, n = the number of characters, Xy = the value of character i in OTU j, xik = the
value of character i in OTU k.
Euclidean distance was selected as the primary measure of dissimilarity, because an
Euclidean model seemed natural for log transformed and standardized data. However, cityblock metric (divided by the number of characters) was also used:
1    n
dcjk = -    jXij-xik|.
n i=i
This is proportional to the Manhattan metric of Lance & Williams (1967); it is the mean
character difference of Sneath & Sokal (1973).
Principal components ordination was performed on the correlation coefficient matrix,
after the same re-expression, transformation and standardization as above.
Interfertility. Artificial crosses were attempted between seven pairs of species/subspecies
by hand pollination. Resulting seeds were germinated, and the growth of seedlings from
them followed.
Results and interpretation
Populations within species. All subspecies and species represented by more than one
population form discrete groups in the classification (Fig. 2). This supports traditional species delimitation in the genus. It is also support for the adequacy of
using only seven characters, for the character transformation etc. and for the type
of numerical classification used. Whilst perfect species discrimination could be
coincidence, with inappropriate methods and indistinct species, it seems most likely
that the methods a priori preferred supported the traditional species because those
species are real and the methods are appropriate ones. Zajac (1974) also found
that numerical classification distinguished between the two subspecies of F. officinalis^ though with intermediates classified with both subspecies.
In the ordination too (Fig. 3, Table 3), the populations of any subspecies or
species form a contiguous area. However, it is clear that there is considerable
variation within some species, and the gaps between some species are quite small
compared with this variation  for example between F* capreolata and F. muralis.
Species relationships. The phenetic classification is compared with Pugsley's
(1919, etc.) classification in Fig. 4. There is considerable agreement, even allowing
for rearrangement that has been made in Pugsley's order of taxa. Sections Grandiflora and Parviflora are supported to the extent that the representatives of subsectt.
Eu-Agrariae and Capreolatae, and one representative of subsect. Murales form a
group in the dendrogram. However, two other members of Pugsley's subsect.
Murales of sect. Grandiflora fuse first with F. officinalis from the other section.
The other two subsections of sect. Parviflora chain onto the other species, indicating
that they are not particularly similar to each other.
The ordination (Fig. 3) confirms this. Although Pugsley's sections form two
halves of the ordination diagram, there is no corresponding discontinuity. F. officinalis is indeed as close to F. martinii and F. bastardii of sect. Grandiflora as it
is to F. densiflora and F. bractcosa of its own section. In terms of discontinuity,
subsect. Latisepalae is indeed no closer to subsect. Microsepalae than it is to the
remainder of the genus.
Subsections within sect. Parviflora are confirmed in that F. vaillantii and F.
parviflora fuse first with each other (Fig. 4). F. bracteosa and F. densiflora also
fuse first with each other, though at a high dissimilarity level, suggesting that from
this evidence the subsection could be split.
Within sect. Grandiflora, Pugsley's subsections are not supported by this phenetic analysis. The two species representing subsect. Capreolatae fuse first with
species in other subsections. The similarity across subsection boundaries between
F. capreolata and F. muralis is seen also in the ordination (Fig. 3), where some
populations of the two species approach each other closely. The dendrogram (Fig.
4) indicates them to be more closely related in the characters used than the two
subspecies of F. officinalis. This supports Hooker's (1884) treatment of F. capreolata and F. muralis as subspecies of one species.
Likewise, F. occidentalis and F. purpurea are shown by both the dendrogram
(Fig. 2) and the ordination (Fig. 3) to be close, although Pugsley placed them in
different subsections (Fig. 4). F. martinii and jF. bastardii are indicated in the
dendrogram as closer than some of the populations of F. muralis are to each other
(Fig. 2), or some of those of F. officinalis subsp. officinalis.
Interferfility. There is a generally high degree of interfertility amongst these
species (Table 4).
F1 seedlings from the F. muralis x F. martinii cross were grown on, and they
proved fully fertile, setting good seed. This supports Pugsley's classification, which
placed them in the same series (Fig. 4) rather than our phenetic analysis, which
placed them in rather separate groups.
The F. bastardii x F. capreolata F1 seedlings were also grown on, but failed
to produce good seed. Meiotic analysis of pollen mother cells from the hybrid
showed some bivalent formation, together with numbers of univalents scattered
throughout the cells. However, colchicine application to the stem apices of the F1
plants produced some branches with the characters of F. occidentalis. Cytogenetic
studies of mitotic chromosomes from apices of these branches, gave chromosome
counts of approximately 2n=112, indicating a doubling-up of the hybrid component. Wild F. occidentalis also has a chromosome number of 2n= 112, the sum
of those of F. bastardii (48) and F. capreolata (64). The induced tetraploid branches
set good seed. We suggest that F. occidentalis arose as a natural allopolyploid
between F. bastardii and F. capreolata. Neither Pugsley's classification, nor our
phenetic analysis, had predicted such an origin for it, both placing the putative
parents and their offspring in rather different groups.
F. rnuralis x F. officinalis subsp. wirtgenii formed only two mature fruits, but
the numbers are too small to draw conclusions. Anyway, both Pugsley and the
present phenetic analysis indicate them as only distantly related.
F. rnuralis x F. capreolata failed to produce viable seedlings. This supports
Pugsley, who placed them in different subsections, rather than the phenetic analysis, Hammar (1858) and Hooker (1884), all of which classifications indicated
them to be neighbours.
F. purpurea x F. capreolata also failed to produce viable seedlings. This supports
the phenetic analysis, rather than Pugsley who put them in the same series.
Discussion
Robustness of the conclusions to analysis variants. Johnson (1970) points out that
phenetic analyses can be subjective if the measure of dissimilarity or the sorting
strategy are chosen subjectively. Here, character expression, transformation and
standardization, as well as sorting strategy and dissimilarity measure were all chosen
for a priori reasons (see Material and methods). Moreover, an independent test of
the choice of methods is available from the treatment of populations of one species.
The preferred method succeeded in forming pure groupings of the populations for
all species and subspecies (Fig. 2). The results of alternative analyses (not presented)
will be briefly described, to indicate the extent to which taxonomic conclusions
would differ.
Using the city block metric in place of Euclidean distance, the dendrogram was
almost identical; the only topographical difference was that one population of F.
rnuralis, the last to join others of the species in our primary analysis, joined them
after F. capreolata. This emphasizes the close similarity of those two species, and
does not affect taxonomic conclusions.
Median sorting strategy is also space-conserving, and has the theoretical advantage over group average that it is less affected by a group of similar OTUs.
However, it gave a dendrogram that was hard to use because of the presence of
reversals, as is typical for this strategy (Lance & Williams 1967). Differences from
our primary analysis were minor. F. purpurea and F. occidentalis jointed the F.
capreolata/F. rnuralis/F. martimijF. bastardii group later and singly, and F. vaillantii
and F. parviflora also joined singly.
Nearest-neighbour sorting, favoured by some numerical taxonomists (Jardine
& Sibson 1968) gave, as usual (Sokal & Sneath 1973) considerable chaining.
However, no contradictory taxonomic conclusions were indicated. For example,
F. officinalis still joined first with species of Pugsley's sect. Grandiflora. There was
still no support for Pugsley's sect. Eu~Capreolatae and ser. Eu-Murales; rather
the affinity of F. muralis and F. capreolata was again emphasized.
Omitting all transformation resulted only in F. purpurea joining first with F.
capreolata.
The ordination diagram (Fig. 3) indicates these variations as being alternative
expressions of the relationships seen there, rather than as indicating different taxonomic conclusions.
We therefore believe our taxonomic conclusions from these analyses to be robust.
Seven variates is a very small number, dictated largely by the paucity of differences
between the species. However, our results suggest that seven variates, carefully
measured and carefully analysed, can give meaningful results.
When multivariate methods such as these are used in ecology, they are used
simply for data summary, and methods can be evaluated on the basis of their
performance (e.g., Williams & al. 1973). In taxonomy, numerical methods should
be a realization of the intended basis of taxonomy; there is little agreement on what
that basis should be.
Evidence from cytology. F. purpurea, with a reported chromosome number of
2n = 80, would fit reasonably into subsect. Agrariae, as suggested by the dendrogram, since this number has been reported from subsect, Agrariae and not from
other members of subsect. Capreolatae (Table 1). Pugsley's association of F.
muralis and F. martinii is supported against the evidence of our analysis by their
sharing a chromosome number of 2 n = 48 (Table 1). However, the association of
F. bastardii with F. martinii, suggested by the dendrogram, is supported by its
having a diploid number of 48 also.
Pugsley's placement of F. officinalis in sect. Parviflora is supported by the
commonest diploid chromosome number in F. officinalis being 32, and by this
number being common in subsect. Microsepalae (Table 1). However, 2n = 48 is
found in F. officinalis subsp. wirtgenii, and whilst this is also found in species and
populations of subsect. Microsepalae it is the most common chromosome number
in sect. Grandiflorae. No conclusion can be drawn in this case from the chromosome
number.
Phenetics and biosystematics. We have suggested that F. occidentalis arose as a
natural hybrid between F. bastardii and F. capreolata, yet our phenetic analysis
separates the three, as does Pugsley's classification. There is no necessary conflict
here. The infertility of the F1 hybrid between them (without polyploidy) confirms
that the putative parents are not closely related, in which case their hybrid could
not be in the same grouping as both, and could well show similarities to a third
grouping.                                                                             /
If a phenetic/biosystematic conflict is seen, it would be similar to that found
by Jackson & Crovello (1971) in Haplopappus, using many more characters (29
or 31), and by Small (1984) in Medicago. Small concluded that his phenetic
analysis was more reliable than the similarity of a hybrid to a third species, but
he did not have the confirmation from chromosome numbers that we have. Jackson
& Crovello (1971) suggested that such conflict was an estimation of the amount
of parallel evolution. Characters that have evolved in parallel can be valid evidence
of relationship, since a tendency to evolve a character is evidence of genetic, epigenetic and hence phylogenetic affinity (Cantino 1985).
p.iytochemical evidence. The alkaloid parfumidine has been found in F. officinalis, F. parviflora and F. vaillantii, amongst other species (Preisner & Shamma
1980), as have (-)styl opine and fumaritine (Forgacs & al. 1982). This could
conarm Pugsley's placement, though it could be an artefact of the species that
have been investigated, as evidenced by the more recent finding of fumaritine in
F. capreolata (Sener 1985).
Conclusions
Al+hough the classification (Fig. 2) and ordination (Fig. 3) are congruent with
previous species boundaries, it must be noted that the dissimilarities between some
species are smaller than those between others. F. marxinii and F, bastardii fuse
before all the populations of F. muralis and F. officinalis subsp. officinalis.
F. capreolata and F. muralis fuse before the two subspecies of F. officinalis.
However, phenetic information on more characters would be required, with
farther information on incompatibility, before a definite conclusion could be made.
The present information supports Pugsley's subsectional classification within
sect. Parviflora. Within sect. Grandiflora his subsections and series are suggested
not to reflect the true relationships. F. capreolata and F. muralis, close in the present
analysis, were placed in separate subsections by Pugsley, and in separate groups
by Haussknecht (1873), though Hammar (1858) and Hooker (1884) did show
them as very close.
Pugsley's two sections are seen to be meaningful, but especially in the case of
sect. Parviflora to represent in arbitrary division of continuous variation, especially
in that F. officinalis is as close to members of the other section (Figs. 2 and 4).
Close similarity between F. parviflora and F. vaillantii, and alignment at a higher
level with F. densiflora and F. officinalis, are also seen in Haussknecht's (1873)
classification, and Hammar's (1858) sections. Possibly, a desire to keep section
sizes comparable affected the sectional delimitations of these authors.
We thank Dr G. L. Rapson for assistance with the analyses.
