CHANGES IN PLANT DISTRIBUTION
FOLLOWING CHANGES IN LOCAL CLIMATE
J. P. Savidge
University College of Wales, Aberystwyth
Causes of change
An examination of Godwin (1956) and the numerous papers
written during the past three decades on pollen stratigraphy of peat
deposits reveals that the composition of the flora in any one area has
been in a state of continual change over the last 10,000 years. In
the past these changes in vegetation were mainly due to the relatively
slight changes in climate; but during the last few thousand years
man has had an increasing influence on the distribution and abundance of species. The changes in climate have not only affected
the environment above ground level, but have also resulted in marked
alterations in the structure and mineral content of the soil. The
loss of several species which require a base-rich soil, with good
drainage, from western parts of Britain during the last few thousand
years is the result of the higher rainfall totals and cooler climate
of these areas leading to the leaching of minerals and the gradual
accumulation of organic matter which makes the soils more acidic
and waterlogged.
The effects of climate can be readily observed on mountains and
hills where the warmer, drier southern slopes are characterised by
good quality hill grazing pastures containing Agrostis tenuis,
A. canina, Festuca ovina, Galium saxatile and frequently Pteridium
aquilinum; whereas the cooler, moister and more peaty soils of the
northern slopes are covered by heaths (Calkma vulgaris, Erica
tetralix, Vaccinium myrtiUus), Car ex binervis, Luzula campestris,
Nardus stricta, Sieglingia decumbens, and numerous mosses and
lichens. Other environmental factors may also be involved as
when we find additional species such as Plantago lanceolata, Thymus
drucei, Trifotium repens, Veronica officinalis and Viola riviniana
which will only occur on the more mineral rich soils. Some of the
differences are reinforced by selective grazing of domestic and wild
animals. Farmers take advantage of these climatic differences
associated with aspect: a short journey through hill country will
soon show that the more productive and improved fields are on
south-facing slopes.
Other obvious ways in which the climate determines the distribution of species can be seen by looking at the maps in the Atlas of
the British Flora. Species, such as Cirsium eriophorum, Galium
pumilum and Tamus communis are confined to the warmer, drier
localities of England and Wales, while, at the other extreme, in the
cooler, moister sites at high elevations in north-west Scotland we
find the only localities for Juncus trifidus, Luzula spicata, Veronica
alpina and a number of other species. The first group includes
those continental species that are at their northern limit of distribution, while the second group contains those that are at their
southernmost stations. The species of these two contrasting
groups have, during the course of their evolution, become adapted to
very different environmental conditions and will normally only
thrive, flower and fruit providing certain environmental factors are
present.
A few species appear to be particularly good indicators of
climatic change, an example being Nardits stricta which is the
dominant grass in areas adjacent to permanent and temporary
snow-beds. In fact, it is such a good indicator species that Green
(1968) and others have used it as a guide to areas where one can
expect snow to persist for the greater part of the year in Scotland.
These areas of quasi-permanent snow-beds in parts of Scotland
appear to be on the increase (Spink 1968, 1969) and could well have
a more pronounced effect on the vegetation of these regions if the
climate continues to become cooler and moister.
The changes in climate outlined by Lamb (p. 11) will certainly
lead to changes in the distribution of species in the British flora, but
these changes will affect different species in differing ways. In
considering these changes it is vitally important to consider certain
genetical and evolutionary implications.
The response to change
Every species has its own range of tolerance to environmental
factorssome grow almost anywhere; others are restricted to just
one or a few localities. Generally speaking, those species which
are widespread (weeds excluded) are outbreeding and possess
a considerable amount of genetic diversity, whereas rare species are
invariably inbreeding, frequently apomictic, as in Hieracium, and
have a limited degree of genetic variability. Because their populations are virtually isolated there is no gene exchange between them
as occurs in closely adjacent populations of more common species.
It is these rare species, with little or no genetic diversity, that are
most likely to become extinct if there are marked climatic changes,
especially alterations in the local environment.
Some of the rarer species could benefit from certain climatic
changes. For instance, if the British climate becomes cooler,
wetter, and more humid as suggested by Lamb, a number of arcticalpine species may extend their range, providing that soil conditions
are suitable in adjacent areas. However his suggestion that dry
easterly winds may become more frequent could result in some
species, which require a continual high humidity, becoming less
abundant as a result of occasional periods of desiccation. Continental species which require a warm soil, with a temperature of at
least 12C for germination, and high summer and autumn temperatures for seed ripening, may well become extinct if the climate
becomes cooler and the growing season shorter unless they can
adapt themselves to the new conditions.
On the other hand, widespread species are not so likely to be
affected by changes in climate since they usually have the ability to
undergo genetic change as a result of natural selection. This has
been clearly shown by the work of Clausen, Keck, and Hiesey
(1940 et seq.) in the United States who have worked on variation
within and between populations and races of Potentilla spp. and
Achillea spp., and by Bradshaw (1960) and his colleagues in this
country who have been looking at species of Agrostis. In Agrostis,
and also in Silene maritima, there are considerable morphological
and physiological differences between populations within a relatively
short distance of one another and, in many instances, it can be
shown that these differences are brought about by the selection of
certain character combinations for specific sets of environmental
parameters.
Most of us are concerned with changes in plant distribution
within our own county, region, or locality rather than overall
changes in distribution throughout the British Isles. By knowing
our local climate we shall eventually obtain a better understanding
of how important climate is, both directly and indirectly, in determining the composition of the vegetation within relatively small
areas as well as throughout the whole of the area under investigation. Areas with a diverse topography are particularly good for
studies of local climate. Investigations will show how the local
climate is affected by aspect, angle of slope, and altitude and that
for example some species only occur on warm well drained southfacing slopes while others are restricted to cooler and moister northfacing slopes.
Extremes of climate are also important and every opportunity
should be taken to find out the consequences of extremes on less
common species, especially those that are at the limits of their
range. For example, the severe winter of 1962-3 killed over 60%
of gorse bushes (Ulex europaeus) in lowland parts of mid Wales
and most of those that survived died back almost to the base.
Some of these eventually recovered, but most of the more vigorous
bushes in 1969 were those that had germinated since 1963. This
shows that the distribution of Ulex europaeus is partly determined
by temperature and that it cannot stand severe prolonged cold
spells; for this reason it rarely occurs above 150m and then only on
south-facing slopes.
For Ulex europaeus a single cold winter was not sufficient to
cause extinction; but a succession of cold winters could have had
a disastrous effect on the distribution of this species, although since
gorse seeds appear to survive in the ground for many years it
could extend its range again if the winters became less severe.
Two points arise from this case: first, the survival of a species
partly depends on how long its seeds remain viable; secondly, it
is concurrent extremes that can result in a species becoming extinct.
This is where the local observer is at a great advantage since the
same extreme climatic events rarely occur throughout the whole of
the British Isles. For example, during the summers of both 1968
and 1969 a number of species have wilted and become completely
desiccated on shallow Powys-type soils in west Wales where we
have had rainfall totals of only about 40% of average; but in
eastern England such observations could not be made since rainfall
totals have been well above average in each of these two summers.
So far I have avoided giving examples of species which have
become either much rarer or more abundant throughout Britain
within recent years as a result of climatic change. This is because it
is difficult to be sure if any marked changes in distribution are
primarily due to the gradual changes that have occurred in our
climate over the last few hundred years. One might, for instance,
think that the occurrence for the first time during the present
century of the many hundred of alien species, of a continental
distribution type, in southern Britain could be because our winters
have become much milder since the middle of the 18th century.
These aliens certainly grow more successfully in hot, dry summers
and may overwinter in mild winters, but their presence in Britain
is more the result of human influence than climatic change. Again,
the disappearance of species such as Agrostemma githago and
Chrysanthemum segetum is unlikely to be due to climatic change, but
rather to improved seed cleaning techniques and agricultural
practices.
Climatic changes have certainly resulted in changes in the
distribution of plants in the past and the process is continuing.
The most satisfactory way of finding out how important climatic
changes are, compared to changes in other environmental factors, in
altering the range of a species, is to carry out detailed recording at
the same site, especially one at which changes are suspected to occur,
at regular intervals. The records should include details on the
performance of the species, the time they come into flower, the
amount of good seeds produced each year, and how many new
plants are added to the population each year. The value of this type
of study is very well illustrated in Pigott's paper (p. 32). This
information will enable us to build up an environmental spectrum
for each species which should tell us the main factors involved in
determining the distribution of each species and, finally, to see if
certain populations can become adapted to a new range of environmental tolerance rather than become extinct.
The environmental spectrum
In Wales we are trying to produce an environmental spectrum
for each species by means of our '00* survey in which we are making
a detailed record of the performance of species in the one kilometre
square (the W square) at the bottom left-hand corner of each of
the 10km national grid squares. Recently we have also been
looking at other representative 1km squares in order to obtain a
fuller coverage.    This has provided us with information on the
range of tolerance for all but the rare species and by resampling,
say at ten yearly intervals, we hope to record changes in distribution
and to relate these modifications to climatic factors, changes in
land-use, etc.
In areas of diverse topography, like most of Wales, there can be
considerable environmental variations within a 1 km square and a
smaller sampling area is necessary to be sure of arriving at genuine
conclusions. So, to supplement the '00' survey, we are now
collecting quadrat data for selected areas and habitats within each
1km square. A quadrat size of 2m has been chosen as we wish to
compare our results with those obtained in recent Scottish surveys.
In the 2m quadrats we record the area occupied by each species,
note the relevant environmental factors, and collect a soil sample
for detailed analysis.
One of the main problems of this type of survey in the past has
been the analysis of the data. But, with the advent of computers,
this task is relatively easy. Projects of this type are ideal for a
team of keen amateur and professional botanists with the latter
having access to computer facilities. This applies particularly to
the compilation of county and regional Floras which can be made
far more informative if details are provided on changes in distribution, and the reasons for these changes, in addition to supplying
lists of localities in which the species have been found. This
extention of the original '00' survey appears to be providing us
with the type of data we require to determine the environmental
tolerance of species and, furthermore, it is now revealing that there
are considerable differences in tolerance within the same species
depending on location and habitat.
Rather more detailed work is being carried out at the University
College of Wales, Aberystwyth on certain areas which are particularly heterogeneous for both environmental factors and habitats.
For this we are using association analysis and other techniques.
So far, most workers have used association analysis methods for
examining the vegetation in just a single area but, as Williams and
Lambert (1960) have pointed out, these methods of finding associations between species and relating distribution to environmental
factors are especially suitable for general survey work covering a
large area. To date our work has been mainly concerned with
hill-pastures and we have selected areas consisting of a mosaic of
different sub-habitats and plant associations. Four areas have
already been investigated but we intend to extend the survey and to
resample at ten-yearly intervals.
Recording climatic change
One of the main difficulties in surveys of this type is relating
changes in vegetation to changes in local climate. The information
obtained by the Meteorological Office and others from Stevenson's
Screens some 1 -5m above ground level can be of some value, but
what we need is records of day to day and seasonal changes where the
more interesting species occur and, in particular, records relating to
climate just above ground level and in the soil. The ideal would
be to have a number of comprehensive, and preferably automatic,
environmental weather stations recording in the more important
nature reserves. A start has been made, but the high cost of the
instruments inevitably means that we cannot obtain an overall
picture of the extremes that occur which are so important to the
proper understanding of plant/climate relationships.
The complex interaction of climatic and other factors can lead
to changes in the distribution patterns of all species. Furthermore,
climatic factors can act indirectly through modifying the soil and
the distribution of species, both above and below ground level,
which compete with the particu]ar species we are investigating.
Competition between species may be more important than was
first realised: it is now known that certain species produce toxic
substances which inhibit the germination and growth of other
species.
Changes in nature reserves
Nature reserves frequently provide the most dramatic illustrations of how the distribution of species can be rapidly modified
as a result of micro-climatic changes brought about by bad reserve
management. In several instances a heavily grazed species-rich
reserve has, within a few years, become a species poor reserve
dominated by Dactylis glomerata and Deschampsia ccspitosa
because a fence was put around the reserve and no regular grazing
allowed. By their vigorous growth, these two rank species of grass
radically altered the climate, at and just above, ground level. As
they grew the patches between the clumps of grass became overgrown, the amount of light reaching the ground decreased, and the
soil became moister and cooler as evaporation was reduced. As a
result many of the smaller and more interesting species of both
plants and animals, for which the reserve was established, have
become extinct. This illustrates why it is most important to find
out the environmental factors which control the growth of the more
interesting species which we wish to preserve: in most instances it is
best to maintain the same management policy since it was the system
of previous land-use that led to the area being sufficiently interesting
for it to be acquired as a nature reserve in the first instance.
Perhaps we should look ahead and consider whether we should
alter the micro-climate of parts of our larger reserves to create new
climates which would lead to additional species coming into the
reserve preferably on their own accord rather than being deliberately
introduced. This would help us in our study of the effect of climate
on various species since we could then see how quickly the new species arrived, how rapidly they spread, and whether they maintained
themselves or gradually decreased after reaching a certain level, to
be replaced by more successful, later, introductions. By doing
this we shall find out just how the climate affects all the species in our
reserves: this, one hopes, will result in the production of efficient
management plans designed to maintain the diversity of both the
environment and the species within our reserves.
